---
layout: project
title: MAE 4300 Ethical Analysis
description: Ethical Analysis of Boeing 737 MAX Incident
technologies: [N/A]
image: /assets/images/boeing-737-max.jpg
---

The Boeing 737 MAX accidents of late 2018 and early 2018 exposed significant engineering failures in the design of the aircraft’s Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System (MCAS). While the immediate cause of these accidents was MCAS, with a closer look we can see that there was a complex interaction between technical decisions, organizational pressures, and regulatory structures that ended up undermining public safety. By examining the Boeing 737 MAX case study through the lens of the ASME Code of Ethics, this essay will analyze the ways in which prioritizing organizational success over professional responsibility can lead to catastrophic consequences.

One of the foremost issues in this case is whether the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) should have delegated substantial portions of the 737 MAX certification process to Boeing itself. In order to speed up the certification of complex new aircraft and accommodate for limited FAA staffing, the FAA relied heavily on Boeing’s Organization Designation Authorization (ODA) unit to certify the 737 MAX. The ODA was allowed to approve key aspects of the flight control system based on Boeing’s own internal analysis (USDOT). Although Boeing engineers possessed the technical competence required to evaluate MCAS (as required by ASME Canon 2), financial and organizational incentives at Boeing were aligned with rapid certification and cost reduction. Certification authority was delegated to the same organization that stood to profit from approval, compromising the independence required to safeguard public welfare. This is a failure under Canon 4 and Canon 2 of ASME’s ethical hierarchy, which require engineers to avoid conflicts of interest and hold public safety paramount (ASME). 

Closely related to the question of regulatory delegation is whether Boeing engineers should have deferred critical MCAS design decisions to company leadership. Throughout the 737 MAX program, Boeing made it a priority to design the airframe in a way that avoided the FAA pilot retraining requirements that are associated with new aircraft (USDOT). In order to do this, they needed to preserve a common type rating between the 737 MAX and earlier 737 models; as such, engineers were expected to minimize the number of changes to the airframe wherever possible. At the same time, the use of larger, more fuel-efficient engines on the MAX degraded the plane’s natural handling qualities, particularly at high angles of attack. Pursuant to the goal of minimizing airframe changes, Boeing expanded the authority and frequency of MCAS activation to compensate for these altered flight behaviors despite engineering analysis that indicated that failure of a single angle-of-attack (AOA) sensor could result in catastrophic outcomes, including loss of the aircraft (USDOT). Under these circumstances, deferring technical judgment to managerial priorities conflicted directly with engineers’ obligations under ASME Canons 1 and 2 to prioritize public safety and exercise independent professional expertise (ASME).

The expanded reliance on MCAS also surfaces ethical concerns surrounding the 737 MAX design goals: should it have been designed primarily for low cost or for high redundancy and robust safety margins? At the time of the 737 MAX program, Airbus had just released the A320 neo, with considerable early market success. This put pressure on Boeing to deliver a comparable aircraft quickly and at a competitive price point. This meant strong incentives to minimize development time, certification complexity, and manufacturing cost. Thus, when the undesirable handling characteristics of the new engine mounting were discovered, Boeing opted for a software-based solution that used an existing single-sensor system with limited redundancy. Higher levels of hardware redundancy or more extensive structural modifications would have increased both cost and regulatory scrutiny, making them less attractive from a business perspective. While ASME Canon 3 encourages efficient and well-executed engineering solutions, safety requirements must always be fully satisfied per Canon 1. (ASME) Unfortunately, in the  case of the 737 MAX, competitive pressures led to the sacrifice of safety.

Equally troubling was Boeing’s failure to ensure that all engineers involved in MCAS-related systems were informed of design changes. As MCAS implementation expanded from its initial scope, not all relevant engineering teams were notified or consulted (USDOT). This breakdown in internal communication violates ASME Canon 2, which requires engineers to operate within their areas of competence; engineers are only able to make appropriate design decisions when they have access to complete and accurate information (ASME). Especially in the case of safety-critical systems, excluding relevant engineers from discussions of major changes prevents meaningful risk assessment.

Finally, we move to Boeing’s decision not to fully disclose MCAS changes to the FAA, airlines, and pilots. In documents submitted to the FAA, Boeing characterized MCAS as a minor modification to an existing speed trim system. The system was also not referenced in pilot flight manuals (USDOT). As a result, pilots were unaware of MCAS’s existence and unprepared to respond when it malfunctioned. While Boeing may have feared revealing proprietary details or triggering additional training requirements, their withholding of information deprived pilots of the knowledge needed to prevent disaster. This decision represents a conflict between ASME Canon 7, which requires truthful and objective public communication, and Canons 4 and 5, which emphasize loyalty to the employer and protection of proprietary information (ASME). Transparency is paramount when public safety is involved.
It is important to supplement this ethical analysis with an understanding of the practical constraints that complicated decision-making. Company culture discouraged dissent, regulatory delegation made responsibility ambiguous, competition with Airbus intensified pressure on engineering staff, and information silos limited risk assessments. Preventing similar tragedies requires action at multiple levels. Individually, engineers need stronger ethics education, documentation practices, and whistleblower protections. Organizationally, companies must prioritize safety by establishing independent review structures and promoting transparency. Systemically, FAA delegation should be limited, minimum redundancy standards should be developed, and public transparency must be required. Ultimately, the Boeing 737 MAX case illustrates that engineering ethics failures do not happen in isolation.  Reaffirming the primacy of ASME’s ethical principles—especially the obligation to protect public welfare—is essential to prevent future disasters.

References:

ASME (The American Society of Mechanical Engineers). “Code of Ethics of Engineers.” ASME, 2024, https://www.asme.org/getmedia/1d9d64bf-f6a7-4e75-a8f5-0cabd8c04269/p-15-7-ethics_2.pdf

Federal Aviation Administration. “Summary of the FAA’s Review of the Boeing 737 MAX: Return to Service of the Boeing 737 MAX Aircraft” FAA, Nov. 2022, https://www.faa.gov/sites/faa.gov/files/2022-08/737_RTS_Summary.pdf.

United States Department of Transportation (USDOT), Office of Inspector General. “Timeline of Activities Leading to the Certification of the Boeing 737 MAX 8 Aircraft and Actions Taken After the October 2018 Lion Air Accident.” Federal Aviation Administration, Oct. 2020, https://www.oig.dot.gov/sites/default/files/library-items/1_FAA%20Oversight%20of%20Boeing%20737%20MAX%20Certification%20Timeline%20Final%20Report_R.pdf.


